in 19th century vienna the duchess falls
in love with a mysterious magician and
illusionist but her fiance the ruthless
crown prince leopold discovers the
affair her body is found in the river
one morning and then her lover seemingly
summons her spirit before the people to
account the details of her murder
welcome to movie splain in today's video
we'll be recapping a film called the
illusionist enjoy this video we begin in
the midst of the plot in late 19th
century vienna as master magician and
illusionist eisenheim is performing at
the theater in front of a large audience
the police and chief inspector hule are
present among the observers eisenheim
seems to be conjuring up something a
spirit of some sort but his performance
is interrupted when the inspector and
the police then abruptly shut down his
show and attempt to arrest him the crowd
goes hysterical and rushes in when they
hear that the great eisenheim is being
arrested chief inspector ool then goes
to see the crown prince leopold he tells
him that they still haven't figured out
how eisenheim creates such illusions and
he isn't willing to talk leopold tells
him that they should force him to speak
by using something from his past this
prompts hool to ponder over eisenheim's
mysterious past as he recounts the
history of eisenheim for the prince we
go through a timeline of eisenheim's
life leading up to the arrest eisenheim
was born the son of a cabinet maker in
austria-hungary his inspiration or
origin story rather for taking on magic
as a lifelong profession has many
variations to it since he's very famous
and his story has been told many times a
lot of people have exaggerated certain
parts of it one such variation goes as
follows one day when he was a teenager
eisenheim met a traveling magician along
a road the magician performed several
tricks for him and then both the
magician and the tree he was sitting
under vanish eisenheim becomes obsessed
with magic tricks after this one day
while practicing one of these tricks he
catches the attention of a young girl
named sophie she is the duchess von
tation he performs some tricks for her
the guards find her and tell her that
she should never befriend the peasants
before taking her back to the castle but
she and eisenheim still manage to sneak
away once in a while and spend time
together in their hideout in the woods
he falls in love with sophie and makes
her a unique marquetry puzzle locket
which if twisted correctly reveals a
small hidden photograph of himself
inside of a heart eisenheim tells her of
his plans to go to china to learn more
magic and sophie promises to escape and
go with him on the day that they are
going to leave the police come looking
for sophie the two hide in the secret
room and sophie begs eisenhower to make
them both disappear he is unable to
fulfill this request and the two are
separated eisenheim leaves his village
to travel the world he perfects his
magic and returns 15 years later as a
master illusionist he performs one of
his most renowned illusions in which he
grows an orange tree out of a single
seed in seconds chief inspector all is
present at the show he is mesmerized by
the trick the next morning he goes
backstage to meet eisenheim and asks him
how it's done with eisenheim only
avoiding the question and turning his
attention he tells eisenheim the reason
he came to see him the crown prince
leopold will be attending his show that
night and he has come to inspect the
place of any threats he meets sophie at
one of his performances when she is
volunteered by the ruthless crown prince
leopold as a reluctant participant in a
trick eisenheim asks her the usual
magician's question of whether they've
met before she says no he thinks that
she may have forgotten him he hypnotizes
her and brings out a huge mirror in
which her reflection soon takes a life
of its own before it is killed by a
replica of her and then a hovering light
is drawn out of the mirror by eisenheim
she then faints right before he catches
her he soon learns that sophie is
expected to marry the crown prince who
purportedly has a history of abuse
towards women the prince requests that
eisenheim performs a private show at the
loftberg for him and his guests
to which he agrees sophie sneaks away
and meets eisenheim privately whereupon
it is revealed that she does remember
him it is brought to ul's attention that
the two of them were spotted together in
a carriage he meets eisenheim and tells
him not to risk his life over the
duchess at the private show eisenheim's
closing act is a performance from which
he drew inspiration from the story of
king arthur and the sword of excalibur
eisenheim requests the sword of the
prince an extravagant weapon decorated
in jewels and makes it balance on its
tip he tells the audience that whoever
can lift it is worthy of ruling and
becoming emperor some of the generals
attempt to but fail finally the prince
tries to retrieve it but it still
doesn't move humiliated he turns to
eisenheim the crowd jokingly mock his
position as ruler before eisenheim lets
the sword go the prince leaves and tells
inspector old to shut down eisenheim's
show and drive him away from the city
sophie asks eisenheim why he would do
such a foolish thing but he is no fool
this was part of his plan later that
night she comes to his workshop telling
him that if he wants to stay in the city
he'll need her help this is exactly what
he wanted to draw her out of the castle
into his workshop so that he can make
like the hulk and smash he finds that
she's still wearing the locket he gave
her they realize that they are still in
love after all this time they plan to
flee the empire together but first
sophie points out something must be done
to stop leopold who she reveals is
planning a coup d'etat usurp the crown
of austria from his aging father the
emperor france joseph the first while
using his engagement to her to win the
hungarian half of the empire as well she
also knows that the crown prince will
view her as disposable if she leaves him
for another man and that he will have
both her and eisenheim followed and
killed in order to protect his ego the
next day a fellow inspector witnesses
eisenheim and sophie kissing he informs
hull who follows eisenheim to the train
station where he hears in on a
conversation between him and an old man
on what sounds like a plan for sophie's
escape leopold finds out for mole that
sophie has met with eisenheim that night
while drunk leopold confronts sophie and
accuses her of being a [ __ ] she tells
him that she will not marry him or have
anything to do with his plan when she
attempts to leave he follows her to the
stables with his sword a servant
overhears the argument and then the
sword being drawn he then witnesses from
the window the duchess falling onto her
horse's back while it rides out of the
castle the next day her horse comes back
with a blood stain on it a search is
carried out and her body is found in the
river inspector ool meets with sophie's
family doctor who tells him that she
bled to death from a cut on her throat
by either a knife or sword he also gives
inspector ul a jewel he found in
sophie's dress unfortunately leopold's
royal status makes any accusations
against him unthinkable despite an
existing belief among the people that
leopold has murdered a woman in the past
wool goes to the stables he spots
sophie's locket in the haystack but
decides not to take it at the time as
eisenheim plunges into despair and the
citizens of vienna begin to suspect
leopold of sophie's murder wull observes
eisenheim's actions more closely on
behalf of leopold racked with grief
eisenheim prepares a new kind of magic
show using mysterious equipment in
chinese stage hands eisenheim purchases
a rundown theater and opens a new
performance during his show eisenheim
apparently summons a spirit of a young
man named franco he speaks to the
audience and answers questions they have
about where he comes from and so on they
begin to ask him about the afterlife and
he becomes confused right before
eisenheim waves him away this leads many
to believe that he possesses
supernatural powers people begin to
admire and look up to him more and more
as his shows progress and he summons
more spirits the inspectors keep a close
eye on him but still can't figure out
how he does it the religious community
come together and discuss how eisenheim
has proven the immortality of the soul
an inspector that's monitoring the
discussion brings the information to
inspector ul he finds out that they want
to transform the empire into a spiritual
republic he takes this information to
leopold and informs him of the influence
eisenheim has on these people leopold
tells him that eisenheim is a faker and
all he needs to do is find out how he
does the trick and then they can arrest
him for fraud since he is fooling people
into believing that he's actually
resurrecting the dead they try to
replicate the illusion but come nowhere
near they sneak into the theater and
find nothing leopold is now mad that
they still haven't gotten rid of
eisenheim he decides to attend one of
eisenheim's shows in disguise during
this show eisenheim summons the spirit
of sophie who says someone in the
theater murdered her panicking leopold
leopold quickly leaves with inspectoral
leopold tells him that eisenheim is
manipulating the audience and
fabricating an accusation eisenheim is
trying to turn the people against him he
orders him to have eisenheim arrested
and imprisoned if he does the same trick
again wool goes to see eisenheim and
tells him that whether it's fake or not
the mere fact that he can perform such a
feat as a gift so he should not bring
sophie back again which would result in
his imprisonment and he will lose the
rest of his life he pleads with
eisenhower to stop but eisenheim refuses
saying that he just wants to be with her
again eisenheim brings sophie back once
again the audience members ask her who
killed her and why she says that she was
trying to leave him without stating who
she also says that she lost her locket
which she had on her that night wool's
attention is caught by this statement
finally bull orders eisenheim's arrest
but when he tries to arrest him
eisenheim's body fades and disappears
just like the spirits inspector wool
first searches for eisenheim at his
house there he finds a folio labelled
orange tree the name of one of
eisenheim's illusions which had
intrigued him thinking he will find the
solution to one of the magician's most
famous tricks he opens it to find empty
pages except for a scrap of parchment
showing how to open the locket eisenheim
had given sophie when they were young he
goes back to the barn and finds the
locket he uses the instructions to open
it and finds the picture of eisenheim
inside the picture falls into the
haystack and next to it all spots a
green jewel he goes to leopold's
headquarters and requests his servant to
bring him the imperial sword he finds
that two jewels are missing a green and
red one he places the green jewel inside
and sees that it fits perfectly at this
point we return to the first scene of
the movie wool reveals to leopold that
he has found evidence which links him to
sophie's murder the sword is now in
police custody and the other jewel is
being matched as they speak leopold
tells him that his father will never
believe that he's a murderer ool agrees
and reveals that is why he wrote a
letter informing the emperor of his
son's plan to overthrow him it is
revealed that he knew of the plan in
fact he wasn't on it he decided to help
leopold with the promise that he may
become chief of police once leopold is
in power as emperor he also believed it
was for the better as the emperor was
running the empire into the ground but
he believed leopold was going to do
better for the people but now that he is
certain he's working for a murderer he
doesn't want leopold in power at all the
imperial gods arrive to arrest leopold
he retrieves a pistol from a cabinet and
threatens to kill ul he then turns the
pistol on himself claiming all he wanted
was for the benefit of the people of the
empire but now he is sick of all of it
he then shoots himself dead in the next
scene ul is shown leaving the imperial
palace after he takes a few steps a boy
runs up to hand him a folio labelled
orange tree
this time the orange tree folio is
filled with plans detailing a geared
mechanism to make the tree growl wool
demands to know where the child obtained
the folio the child reveals that
eisenheim had given it to him wool spots
eisenheim wearing a disguise and follows
him to the train station after the chase
a montage shows all piecing together how
eisenheim faked sophie's death and
framed the crown prince how the family
doctor was a friend of eisenheim's and
while one may think that all would be
enraged at eisenheim he is actually very
much amused meanwhile eisenheim is seen
walking up to a house in the country
where sophie had been waiting for him
[Music]
you